Garchomp is a bipedal, draconian Pokemon that is primarily dark blue in color. It has red on its underbelly from the lower jaw to the middle of the abdomen, including the undersides of its arms. A patch of gold comes to a point below the red on its belly, and a golden star shape adorns the tip of its snout. Garchomp has horn-like appendages that resemble a jet or plane's engines, giving it an appearance similar to a hammerhead shark. These horns allow it to sense its prey from a long distance. Its large mouth features razor-sharp teeth. The feet have three white talons, and each arm has a single large, white claw for a hand. Curved fins sprout from the arms, creating wings that allow Garchomp to fly. Garchomp also has a large dorsal fin and another on its tail that resembles a shark tailfin. The male's dorsal fin has a notch on it. Pairs of small, white spikes protrude from its upper arms and legs, and there are gill-like slits on the sides of the neck. The eyes are intense, with black sclerae and gold-colored irises.

Garchomp can fly at an incredible speed to catch its prey, being capable of flying as fast as a jet, cutting down trees with its blades of wind, a magnificent sight to witness. It is able to move in both the air and underground. It preys on bird Pokemon and is known to eat entire flocks of them whole. It sometimes battles Salamence in the air as they compete for food. After catching prey, it returns to its den before its body can cool down. The fine scales on its body reduce drag for easier flight, and their sharp edges also serve to injure opponents who attack it directly. It can use its protuberances as sensors for finding distinct prey. Garchomp lives in mountainous regions, both volcanic and boreal, and typically dwells underground. However, it is seldom sighted in the wild. Garchomp is described as having a feral nature, requiring extreme caution should anyone encounter it.

In Generation IX, Garchomp and its pre-evolved forms are the only known Pokemon that can have Rough Skin as an Ability.
Garchomp can Mega Evolve into Mega Garchomp.

When Garchomp Mega Evolves, several of its features become more angular, including its head and shoulders. A row of five tooth-like spikes sprouts from each side of its abdomen and red spikes grow from its knees. The claws and fins on its arms melt from the excessive Mega Evolution energy and morph together to form sharp, red blades. Because Garchomp takes great pride in its winglike fins, it is enraged at the sight of them melting into scythes. Its scythes can slice the ground to pieces, and Mega Garchomp viciously tears up its opponents with them.

Garchomp debuted in Top-Down Training!, where she was seen battling Lucian's Bronzong. Even though Bronzong was shown to be a powerful Pokemon in the battle against Dawn's Buizel in An Elite Meet and Greet!, the Bronze Bell Pokemon's Flash Cannon barely did any damage to Garchomp, who knocked it out with Giga Impact. In the same episode, she battled against Paul when Cynthia accepted Paul's challenge for a Full Battle. Once again, her incredible resistance was showcased, as Cynthia allowed her to absorb Chimchar's Fire Spin and Weavile's Blizzard, before knocking out the former with Dig and the latter with Dragon Rush. She easily overpowered his Murkrow, with Giga Impact besting Sky Attack, before fighting against his powerful first partner Pokemon, Torterra. Torterra managed to inflict damage on Garchomp, momentarily immobilized from using Giga Impact, with Giga Drain. When it tried to follow up with Frenzy Plant, however, Garchomp pried apart the roots and knocked Torterra out with a Brick Break to the head. Paul forfeited after this, giving Cynthia the win.

In Losing Its Lustrous! and Double Team Turnover!, Garchomp was used to battle Team Galactic's Pokemon. Her strength was once more demonstrated in the simple defeat of Saturn's Bronzor. She also fought Mars's Purugly and Saturn's Toxicroak with help from Ash, Dawn, and Cynthia's Gastrodon. However, they ultimately failed to prevent Team Galactic from obtaining the Lustrous Orb.
Garchomp flying with Dawn's Piplup on her back

In Aiding the Enemy!, Garchomp battled Aaron's Drapion on television. The outcome of this particular battle isn't known, though Cynthia ended up being the winner.

She also appeared along with Cynthia in a cameo appearance at the beginning of Arceus and the Jewel of Life, battling Palmer's Milotic.

In The Battle Finale of Legend!, Garchomp knocked out Jupiter's Skuntank with a single Giga Impact and restrained Jupiter herself. She then bore Dawn's Piplup into battle against Team Galactic and used Draco Meteor to help attack the Red Chains holding Dialga and Palkia.

Garchomp briefly appeared alongside Cynthia during the ending credits of Zoroark: Master of Illusions.

Garchomp was shown on TV winning a close battle between Flint's Infernape in Memories are Made of Bliss!. Infernape fought well, but was unable to withstand Dragon Rush and was defeated.

In All for the Love of Meloetta!, Garchomp battled Iris's Axew. Axew's Scratch and Dragon Rage successfully hit Garchomp but seemed to do no damage. Garchomp then used her Dragon Rush and Draco Meteor attacks to cause a lot of damage to Axew. At the last second when it seemed like Axew was down, he got back up and ended up knocking Garchomp down with his newly learned Giga Impact. Garchomp quickly recovered and was about to finish Axew off with a Brick Break, but was called off by Cynthia at the last second.

In Jostling for the Junior Cup!, Garchomp battled Caitlin's Gothitelle in an exhibition match for the Pokemon World Tournament Junior Cup. After being initially confused by Flatter, Garchomp was repeatedly slammed on the battlefield and finally lifted high into the air by Gothitelle's Psychic. Overcoming the confusion, Garchomp cleverly used the top of the stadium to launch herself forward to deliver a successful Dragon Rush. After Garchomp's Draco Meteor was stopped by Gothitelle's Thunderbolt and both their Brick Break attacks clashed, the battle's 10-minute time limit ran out, and the match was named a tie.


