Garchomp is a bipedal, draconian Pokemon that is primarily dark blue in color. It has red on its underbelly from the lower jaw to the middle of the abdomen, including the undersides of its arms. A patch of gold comes to a point below the red on its belly, and a golden star shape adorns the tip of its snout. Garchomp has horn-like appendages that resemble a jet or plane's engines, giving it an appearance similar to a hammerhead shark. These horns allow it to sense its prey from a long distance. Its large mouth features razor-sharp teeth. The feet have three white talons, and each arm has a single large, white claw for a hand. Curved fins sprout from the arms, creating wings that allow Garchomp to fly. Garchomp also has a large dorsal fin and another on its tail that resembles a shark tailfin. The male's dorsal fin has a notch on it. Pairs of small, white spikes protrude from its upper arms and legs, and there are gill-like slits on the sides of the neck. The eyes are intense, with black sclerae and gold-colored irises.

Garchomp can fly at an incredible speed to catch its prey, being capable of flying as fast as a jet, cutting down trees with its blades of wind, a magnificent sight to witness. It is able to move in both the air and underground. It preys on bird Pokemon and is known to eat entire flocks of them whole. It sometimes battles Salamence in the air as they compete for food. After catching prey, it returns to its den before its body can cool down. The fine scales on its body reduce drag for easier flight, and their sharp edges also serve to injure opponents who attack it directly. It can use its protuberances as sensors for finding distinct prey. Garchomp lives in mountainous regions, both volcanic and boreal, and typically dwells underground. However, it is seldom sighted in the wild. Garchomp is described as having a feral nature, requiring extreme caution should anyone encounter it.

In Generation IX, Garchomp and its pre-evolved forms are the only known Pokemon that can have Rough Skin as an Ability.
Garchomp can Mega Evolve into Mega Garchomp.

When Garchomp Mega Evolves, several of its features become more angular, including its head and shoulders. A row of five tooth-like spikes sprouts from each side of its abdomen and red spikes grow from its knees. The claws and fins on its arms melt from the excessive Mega Evolution energy and morph together to form sharp, red blades. Because Garchomp takes great pride in its winglike fins, it is enraged at the sight of them melting into scythes. Its scythes can slice the ground to pieces, and Mega Garchomp viciously tears up its opponents with them.

Garchomp debuted in Top-Down Training!, where she was seen battling Lucian's Bronzong. Even though Bronzong was shown to be a powerful Pokemon in the battle against Dawn's Buizel in An Elite Meet and Greet!, the Bronze Bell Pokemon's Flash Cannon barely did any damage to Garchomp, who knocked it out with Giga Impact. In the same episode, she battled against Paul when Cynthia accepted Paul's challenge for a Full Battle. Once again, her incredible resistance was showcased, as Cynthia allowed her to absorb Chimchar's Fire Spin and Weavile's Blizzard, before knocking out the former with Dig and the latter with Dragon Rush. She easily overpowered his Murkrow, with Giga Impact besting Sky Attack, before fighting against his powerful first partner Pokemon, Torterra. Torterra managed to inflict damage on Garchomp, momentarily immobilized from using Giga Impact, with Giga Drain. When it tried to follow up with Frenzy Plant, however, Garchomp pried apart the roots and knocked Torterra out with a Brick Break to the head. Paul forfeited after this, giving Cynthia the win.

In Losing Its Lustrous! and Double Team Turnover!, Garchomp was used to battle Team Galactic's Pokemon. Her strength was once more demonstrated in the simple defeat of Saturn's Bronzor. She also fought Mars's Purugly and Saturn's Toxicroak with help from Ash, Dawn, and Cynthia's Gastrodon. However, they ultimately failed to prevent Team Galactic from obtaining the Lustrous Orb.
Garchomp flying with Dawn's Piplup on her back

In Aiding the Enemy!, Garchomp battled Aaron's Drapion on television. The outcome of this particular battle isn't known, though Cynthia ended up being the winner.

She also appeared along with Cynthia in a cameo appearance at the beginning of Arceus and the Jewel of Life, battling Palmer's Milotic.

In The Battle Finale of Legend!, Garchomp knocked out Jupiter's Skuntank with a single Giga Impact and restrained Jupiter herself. She then bore Dawn's Piplup into battle against Team Galactic and used Draco Meteor to help attack the Red Chains holding Dialga and Palkia.

Garchomp briefly appeared alongside Cynthia during the ending credits of Zoroark: Master of Illusions.

Garchomp was shown on TV winning a close battle between Flint's Infernape in Memories are Made of Bliss!. Infernape fought well, but was unable to withstand Dragon Rush and was defeated.

In All for the Love of Meloetta!, Garchomp battled Iris's Axew. Axew's Scratch and Dragon Rage successfully hit Garchomp but seemed to do no damage. Garchomp then used her Dragon Rush and Draco Meteor attacks to cause a lot of damage to Axew. At the last second when it seemed like Axew was down, he got back up and ended up knocking Garchomp down with his newly learned Giga Impact. Garchomp quickly recovered and was about to finish Axew off with a Brick Break, but was called off by Cynthia at the last second.

In Jostling for the Junior Cup!, Garchomp battled Caitlin's Gothitelle in an exhibition match for the Pokemon World Tournament Junior Cup. After being initially confused by Flatter, Garchomp was repeatedly slammed on the battlefield and finally lifted high into the air by Gothitelle's Psychic. Overcoming the confusion, Garchomp cleverly used the top of the stadium to launch herself forward to deliver a successful Dragon Rush. After Garchomp's Draco Meteor was stopped by Gothitelle's Thunderbolt and both their Brick Break attacks clashed, the battle's 10-minute time limit ran out, and the match was named a tie.

Garchomp appeared alongside Cynthia in Star Night, Star Flight!. She used her to battle against a group of Unown, which created an illusionary Garchomp to combat her. Garchomp eventually managed to defeat the Unown, causing the illusion to disappear.

In The Gates of Warp!, Garchomp was used to stop Alternate World Team Rocket from stealing her and Ash's Pikachu. However, as she fought Alternate Meowth, she forgot how to use Outrage due to the distortions throughout space and time.

In The Arceus Chronicles (Part 3), Garchomp helped stop Saturn's rampaging Heatran from reaching Spear Pillar.
Garchomp battling Haxorus

In The Fiery Road to Mastership!, Cynthia used Garchomp as her third Pokemon in her Masters Eight Tournament match against Iris, where she rematched Haxorus. As their match continued, Cynthia Mega Evolved Garchomp into Mega Garchomp. With her new strength, Garchomp was able to successfully defeat Haxorus after a clash between Dragon Pulse and Draco Meteor, advancing Cynthia to the semifinals.

In Valor: A Strategic Part of Battling!, Garchomp was the fifth Pokemon used by Cynthia in her Masters Eight Tournament battle with Ash, facing his Dracovish. Garchomp was able to land a super-effective Dragon Claw and successfully set up with Stealth Rock before being recalled. She was later sent out to face Sirfetch'd, whom she managed to defeat with Draco Meteor despite taking heavy damage from its Meteor Assault in the process. Afterwards, she was recalled once more. In the next episode, she was sent back out against Mega Lucario as Cynthia's last Pokemon standing. After Cynthia reminisced of her journey with Garchomp, the two Pokemon began a fierce clash with each other, which soon devolved into a brutal slugfest between Dragon Claw and Bullet Punch. Thanks to Reversal, Lucario landed a hard, unexpected hit on Garchomp, dealing the Mach Pokemon her first on-screen defeat and causing Cynthia to lose the battle.
Personality and characteristics
Garchomp's Garchompite
Garchomp's endurance

Cynthia has a strong bond with Garchomp, as she is used more often than any of her other Pokemon. Similar to other Pokemon belonging to Champions, Garchomp can easily withstand attacks coming from other Pokemon with her immense strength and durability, which was shown during the battle with Paul, where she was easily able to defeat Paul's team without a scratch. Cynthia massages Garchomp before battle to help prepare her.

Garchomp was also helpful when Ash and his friends dealt with Team Galactic and Team Rocket on two separate occasions, both for her strength and ability to transport Pokemon into battle.
Garchomp appears in Pokemon Mezastar as one of Cynthia's Pokemon. It appears as an opponent during the second Double Chain series set. Garchomp also appeared as an opponent in an event that recreated the Masters Eight Tournament that ran from October 27 to November 21, 2022. Upon beating Cynthia, the player can receive a Support Pokemon Ticket based on Garchomp, which can Mega Evolve.

In All About Arceus IX, Garchomp, as a Gabite, was seen accompanying Cynthia during her tour in the Johto region. She was with her when she witnessed Dialga and Palkia flying towards Sinnoh.
Diamond & Pearl arc
As a Gabite

Garchomp is Cynthia's main battling Pokemon in Pokemon Adventures. Garchomp is well trained enough that she can battle even without her Trainer giving her commands. Garchomp first appeared with her Trainer in Ring Around the Roserade II, where she held Cynthia's coat while Cynthia helped train Platinum.

In Suffering Psyduck, Garchomp was used to take Diamond, Pearl and Platinum to Route 210 so that Cynthia can heal the Psyduck barricade there. Later, Cynthia lent Garchomp to her Grandmother so that she, Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum could make it to Celestic Town safely. Upon arriving, Garchomp gets into a fight with the leader of Team Galactic, Cyrus. She attempts to prevent Cyrus from entering the Celestic Ruins, but inadvertently assists him in getting inside after her accuracy is lowered, causing her attacks to miss and make a bigger opening.

In Shunning Spiritomb, Garchomp was used as Cynthia's third and final Pokemon against Cyrus at the Galactic HQ. Still angry from their previous battle, Garchomp attacks Cyrus's Gyarados ferociously. Seeing how angry she was, Cynthia has Garchomp use her strongest move, Draco Meteor, despite the fact that they haven't fully mastered the move yet. The attack, while powerful, was made weaker by Garchomp's fury, preventing her from being strong enough to defeat Cyrus, and left Garchomp to pursue the escaping opponent. With Cyrus gone, Garchomp was used to take Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum to the Spear Pillar for the final battle against Cyrus.

In the Platinum arc, Cynthia's grandmother, angry at her granddaughter for what happened at the Galactic HQ, forces Cynthia to train and perfect Draco Meteor. In Alternate Dimension Showdown X, Garchomp used her newly perfected Draco Meteor on Charon and Giratina, who were escaping the Distortion World after their battle with Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum.

Cynthia's Garchomp first appeared in Dialga's Secret Keys. Garchomp was sent out to slash the String Shot coming from B-2's three Wurmple.

In Will Hareta's Wish Get Through?!, Garchomp was sent out to block an attack coming from Jupiter's Crobat.

In A New Battle Begins!, Garchomp was used to battle Mitsumi's Infernape. Both sides charged at each other with Giga Impact and Overheat, respectively. They were both recalled for Lucario and Electivire. Garchomp and Infernape were sent out again later on. Infernape attacked with Focus Blast in which Garchomp dodged. The Focus Blast headed straight for Hareta and Koya, in which Koya protected himself with Metagross. Garchomp won the battle by default when Mitsumi decided to resign seeing that it was more fun for her to watch the tournament instead of fighting in it.

This listing is of cards mentioning or featuring Cynthia's Garchomp in the Pokemon Trading Card Game.

